---
title: When a Woman Collects
layout: default
---

# When a Woman Collects Menus <small>Sifting Stories and Histories of Frank E. Buttolph’s Research Collection</small>

The collection of historic menus at the New York Public Library (NYPL) was created by a woman named Frank E. Buttolph. From the beginning, she intended the collection to be a research collection. In much of what has been written and documented (and repeated over and over again) about the menu collection, commentators launch into discussions of the collection’s size and richness, pausing momentarily to regret the paucity of information available about its creator. According to this common trope, Buttolph is a “mysterious and passionate figure” [cite: NYPL web site] who led a “quite private life” [cite: Ryley Biblion] about which (regrettably) not much can be known [cite: Federman blog]. Yet in trying to make good on Buttolph’s original intent—that the collection be used for research—and also in trying to curate the digital data set that NYPL has created from this physical collection, we found ourselves unable to accept the historical absence of the collection’s creator.

We wanted to understand the provenance of the menus data and, therefore, needed to know how the physical collection that underpins the digital data came to be. To maintain, or even improve, “the interest and usefulness” of the menus data for humanities scholarship [cite: Cragin et. al], we want to situate the collection in local and historical context. To achieve this, we needed to understand more about Buttolph herself. The more we researched Buttolph’s life, the more we found ourselves compelled to tell a better and fuller story about her and her work as collector in the early twentieth century.  

The details of Buttolph's life are not as unknowable as we had been led to believe. A fairly sturdy outline can be assembled from surviving documentary sources—work made easier, no doubt, by the growth of digitized collections available for full-text searching. Yet having more of “the facts” about Buttolph at our disposal paradoxically increased the challenge of doing research with her collection. We were prepared to find that aspects of Buttolph’s personal history had perhaps overtly shaped which menus she collected—either through access (to particular strata of society versus others) or through enthusiasm (for particular types of menus). To some extent, this is the case, but the interconnections between the life and the collection—and now its descendant, the data set—are less overt and more interesting. 

Our research pushes back against the most oft-repeated stories about the historic menu collection and its creator. These brief narratives emphasize the eccentricity of the menu collecting project or frame it as a personal obsession, and present Buttolph as a lucky amateur and an enigmatic spinster. Instead of the personal project of an amateur collector, which happened, by good fortune, to become folded into the collections of the New York Public Library, we now understand this collection as a research collection built by a woman invested in cultural preservation and public knowledge-building. We can see the menus collection as the contribution of a woman whose work was in sync with the project of the larger institution around her during one of the library’s most diverse and active periods of collection building. Indeed, finding out more about Buttolph suggests that what is mysterious here is not her biography but the prevailing representation that casts her life as mysterious and not profitable or interesting to investigate further. 

Once we focused on this more interesting story, we had to grapple self-consciously with the challenges of how to make sense of this woman, her work, and the data that derives from that work. As we researched Buttolph, we found ourselves asking questions about what it meant to tell her story. We faced what historian Jill Lepore calls the “tricky work” of writing about people’s lives.  In the case of Buttolph’s story, the challenges stem both from records which (while not so barren as suggested) must still be counted slender and also from the awkward fit between the picture of Buttolph we can develop and traditional “Great Man” or even Great Woman notions of biographical subjects [cite: Caine].
 
In her essay in <em>The Journal of American History</em>, Lepore makes a distinction between different types of writing about people’s lives based on the aims of each type. Writers can “seek to profile an individual and recapitulate a life story,” in order that readers might know the person better. Or, they can “address themselves to solving small mysteries about a person’s life as a means to exploring the culture” [cite: Lepore]. Researching Buttolph’s life had the built-in dramatic interest that motivates not only scholars but also genealogists and family historians—“tracing [an] elusive character through slender records,” celebrating each new crumb or cache of documentary evidence. Every discovery of a detail about Buttolph seemed to invest us in a project of recovering her personal story. Yet what should we make of one (incomplete) life story? 

We also want to understand Buttolph’s life as a way of better curating the data set built from her menu collection. When placed in historical context, the tension between exploring Buttolph’s life story for itself or for what it can tell us carries a specific charge. We suspect that the lack of attention paid to Buttolph’s life comes not only from the specific circumstances of that life but also from the wider culture in which she lived (and in which we still live). That is to say: it matters that Buttolph was a woman.

Evaluating historians’ progress at “writ[ing] women into the history of librarianship,” Suzanne Hildenbrand found three kinds of attempts [cite: Hildenbrand]. As summarized by Phyllis Dain, these approaches include: 1) “compensatory history that rescues women from obscurity”; 2) “delineation of a separate women’s culture with its own validity”; and 3) “the study of women in history, interacting with men and involved in the dominant patriarchal culture” [cite: Dain]. The thrill of the historical chase, the excitement of “discovery”, the pleasing sense of fairness might incline us toward a project of rescuing Buttolph, the individual, from obscurity. However, it is something more like the third kind of analysis that is integral to the project of using the menus data to produce new knowledge: acknowledging her gender as a significant factor for the way it helps us to account for “the systematic ways in which sex differences cut through society and culture and [confer] inequality upon women” [cite: Canning, Scott]. And here is the rub that makes this a project of humanities data curation. The interpretive strategies that comprise humanities research have been developed to give purchase on questions just like these.

If the common, easy narratives about Buttolph and the collection are problematic not just for what they get wrong about the woman but also for what they get wrong about the meaning of the resulting collection and data set, what considerations would improve them? As a beginning, we (re)consider her collecting practices, her relationship to the library around her, and her gender as ways to critique the presentation of a “mysterious and passionate Miss Frank E. Buttolph”.

--- When Women Acquire

<blockquote><p>When women acquire the collecting mania, they often branch out in the most unexpected directions, and take up what appear to be trivial and foolish specialties.  Sometimes these develop into collections of real value, the more so because no one else thought it worth while to make such collections.</p>

<p>It was a fairy-tale queen, was it not, who was so wrapped up in her collection of buttonholes?  We thought her very silly in the fairy-tale, but we appreciate her now as the patron saint of all museums of domestic art.</p>

<p>When Miss Frank Buttolph began to collect menu cards and bills of fare, no one thought of it as anything better than a rather tiresome freak, on which a vast amount of energy was being wasted that might have been expended better. [cite: Literary Collector]</p></blockquote>

The writer of the <em>Literary Collector</em> magazine’s March 1905 “Notes” section presents “Miss Frank Buttolph” as an amateur, eccentric, a woman obsessed with a bizarre collection. This representation is not unusual, for Buttolph or many other woman collectors of the time. [Beth Muellner, “The Empress Elisabeth of Austria and Her ‘Untidy’ Collection,” Women’s Studies, 39:536–561, 2010; J Samaine Lockwood, “Shopping for the Nation: Women's China Collecting in Late-Nineteenth-Century New England,” The New England Quarterly, Vol. 81, No. 1 (Mar., 2008), pp. 63-90; “The Gender of Collecting,” Museums, Objects, and Collections] Over the course of the final lengthy paragraph of this brief notice, the Literary Collector’s anonymous writer seems to be won over to the value of Buttolph’s collection. “When she began to get menus in all languages from all countries, [the collection] grew a bit interesting to the scoffer,” the writer avers. In the end, the writer mostly concedes that the collection will be “invaluable to the late twentieth or twenty-first century writer of the history of the nineteenth-century civilization,” without fully subscribing to this conclusion or recanting the gendered caricature which opened the piece. “For the historian of the future has Miss Buttolph consciously been making this collection, and she feels sure of his appreciation” (emphasis added). In many ways, this note in the Literary Collector encapsulates how Buttolph and her work have been viewed. The biting acerbity of this depiction makes plain stereotypes that surround Buttolph, often subtly, into the twenty-first century. 

By telling the story of Frank E. Buttolph’s collection—yet again—and telling the story of those stories told about her, we hope to provide new contexts for understanding her work as a collector. We begin with stories about the origin of the collection.  When Buttolph and her collection were featured in newspaper articles, journalists often retell a story about how Buttolph’s awareness of the changing century—specifically her first sight of the year “1900” printed on the menu of a restaurant she visited in Union Square on New Year’s Day—inspired her project of collecting for the Library.  Buttolph herself recounted this story in a letter to the New York Public Library’s board of trustees:

<blockquote>On New Year's Day I stopped in the Columbia Restaurant for lunch and thought it might be interesting to file a bill of fare at the library. A week later the thought occured [sic], why not preserve others? As a result 930 have passed through my fingers to the Astor Library.</blockquote>

Comparing the various contemporary newspaper articles about the menu collection, many of which feature reported statements by Buttolph herself, suggests that she did not mind changing the tale of the collection’s creation to make a better story. Exactly when, how, and why the collection was started change between tellings. The New Years’ story has dramatic appeal but was the collection project started in early 1900 or in 1899? Did Buttolph “walk into the library and ask to speak to the director” [cite: Lesy and Stoffer] about commencing the project, or was it proposed at a board of trustees meeting? The changing versions and details allow us to see the effects of gender and power relations shaping the narrative and how Buttolph used press attention in service of her project.

The first notice of the collection in print, might suggest that Buttolph was just another donor among what was, at the turn of the twentieth century, a growing roll of august and high-minded contributors to the new and expanding New York Public Library. An article in The New York Times, “Gift for the Public Library,” from February 15, 1900, reports on a donation of new funds for purchasing materials on sociology and economics and mentions that “Miss Frank E. Buttles offered to give to the library a collection of a thousand hotel and restaurant menus. She has already turned in over 900 ….” All we have is the journalist’s report on this moment, and it would seem that, in the writer’s mind at least, Buttolph’s project could be classed with the gifts and donations as part of ordinary library business. Yet, very quickly the details of the story do not support of the view of Buttolph as a traditional donor. 

The library’s institutional records add little information about the collection’s genesis. The shape of the story retold in the brief accession sheet accompanying the “Miss Frank E. Buttolph Papers” is familiar but the details differ slightly from the newspaper accounts or Buttolph’s own telling. The library’s record recounts that Buttolph approached the library around the turn of the twentieth century; NYPL Director John Shaw Billings agreed to preserve menus and engaged her to collect them for the library, which she did until the end of her life. The exact phrasing is interesting in its elliptical treatment of just how the commencement of the project was negotiated: “Miss Buttolph inquired whether the library would preserve some then current menus.” There is nothing particularly authoritative about the accession sheet, which is dated March 30, 1987, and represents little more than a convenience for researchers, appended to Buttolph’s personal papers almost sixty-five years after their acquisition as part of the Library’s formal process of registering the collection. Indeed, this record, which asserts only that Buttolph “had friendly relations with the New York Public Library for many years” appears to have been cut-and-pasted together. The bland formulation about “friendly relations” was literally copied into the finding aid for Buttolph’s papers from a notice written by a library staff member on the occassion of Buttolph’s death in 1924. 

Buttolph was mentioned only twice in the library’s own regularly-published bulletins and annual reports. The first (and most extensive) mention, in The Bulletin of the New York Public Library published in January 1907, is a description of her collection included in a summary of the previous half-year’s activities of the Reference Department. This notice refers simply to “the collection of menus, formed largely by Miss Frank E. Buttolph” as though it were part of the library’s collection and not an outside gift and without giving any indication that Buttolph was not a member of the library staff. However, when Buttolph is mentioned again, in an unusually long edition of the Director’s annual report (for calendar year 1909), this much briefer mention appears in a section on “Purchases and Gifts”. The difference may be simple inconsistency—it was surely difficult to keep straight the details of various collections year over year in the context of reports with multiple authors. Combine this discrepancy with the oddities of phrasing in Buttolph’s letter (her reference to “fil[ing] a bill of fare at the library”), in the New York Times reporter’s story (that Buttolph had “turned in” over nine-hundred menus), and in the library’s surviving documentary record of the collection’s origin, and all these seem markers of a more unusual arrangement than donor and gift. The slipperiness of details about how the collection started reflect the ambiguity of Buttolph’s position.

--- Is there not some place in which my knowledge … could be utilized?

At the end of January 1900, about two weeks before her proposal to the library trustees to make a “donation” of the menu collection, Buttolph wrote to NYPL Director Billings to inquire about the possibility of official employment. “I see a great many women employed at the Astor Library. Is there not some place in which my knowledge of books, countries and languages could be utilized in a manner remunerative to myself.” We have not been able to find any record of Billings’ reply (if he made one) and Buttolph never did gain a professional position at the library. However, this brief application does introduce a glimpse into her biography at the moment she was beginning her most active association with NYPL. 

One significant distinction between Buttolph and the “great many” women employed at the library may have been her age. When she made her request, Buttolph was fifty-six years old (only six years younger than Billings himself).

Frank E. Buttolph was born Frances Editha Buttles in 1844, in Mansfield, Pennsylvania [cite: Mansfield blogger & census]. Due to the presence of a state normal school, this small town in north central Pennsylvania close to the border with New York state offered an important educational opportunity to the young Buttolph. The normal school replaced an earlier “classical seminary” in Mansfield in 1862, and offered professional training to prepare high school graduates for careers as schoolteachers. Buttolph was a member of the first graduating class of this new institution. Indeed it was the alumni reports in the annual catalogue/yearbook of the Pennsylvania State Normal School, Mansfield, Tioga County, now digitized and made available at the Internet Archive, that helped us follow Buttolph’s career before she came to NYPL. 

After her graduation, Buttolph embarked on the career of an itinerant school teacher, usually spending only a year in each place. Based on the Normal School catalogs, we can follow her from Mansfield to Rahway, New Jersey; Cattletsburg, Kentucky; Wilmington, Delaware; Brooklyn, New York; and Tivoli, New York. Buttolph and her younger sister Permelia (also a Normal School graduate) ventured as far west as St. Paul, Minnesota, in the mid-1870s. She taught a range of subjects and, as is evident in her later collection development and translation work, was versed in several European languages.

Many of her teaching posts were at schools associated with the Episcopal Church, and Buttolph appears to have been an active church member throughout her life. In the early 1880s, she traveled to Germany and may have visited other destinations in Europe. Gradually, Buttolph’s travels gravitate toward to New York City. Though the evidence becomes spotty, she seems to have more or less relocated there by 1887, with the exception of a return to Mansfield around the time of her parents deaths in 1890 and 1893 respectively. 

From various sources, it’s apparent that Buttolph lived in same general section of Manhattan, between 14th and 19th streets, never far from the Astor Library, for the entire twenty to thirty years she remained in New York. She did gradually move from the east side (near what is now Beth Israel Hospital) to the west side near the 9th Avenue elevated railway, to a section of Chelsea in which the Depression-era New York City Guide noted, “a large number of brownstones, originally built as private residences, have been converted into lodginghouses.” For an educated, well-traveled, single woman, the Astor Library would have been an attractive local resource and perhaps a natural place to spend her free time.  While it appears she may have been collecting before her formal relationship with the Astor Library began, the details of her engagement with cultural preservation emerges most clearly through the trails of letters in periodicals and in archival materials from the NYPL. 


